GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: As
details of the Orlando massacre
become clear,
focus shifts away from the
killer and toward
his wife.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Wednesday:
a look at the Donald Trump
effect. The presumptive
nominee isn't backing down, even
when his
party disagrees -- what this
means for his
campaign and the GOP.
GWEN IFILL: Plus, a "NewsHour"
exclusive:
After a two-year study, Stanford
researchers
find shocking racial injustices
by the Oakland
Police Department.
REBECCA HETEY, Stanford
University: Even when
we took out stops that resulted
in arrests,
we found that one in four black
men, for example,
were handcuffed, compared to one
in 15 white
men.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Investigators in
Orlando worked
today to reconstruct the
movements of the
gunman who killed 49 people over
the weekend.
Omar Mateen died in a gun battle
with police,
after the massacre at a gay
nightclub.
Authorities working the crime
scene today
said they need to know what
Mateen did before
the attack. They wouldn't
confirm that his
wife knew of the plot and might
be charged.
LEE BENTLEY, U.S. Attorney: I am
not going
to speculate today as to any
charges that
may be brought or indeed about
whether any
charges will be brought in this
case. It is
premature to do so.
It would interfere and hamper
the investigation
to put out premature information
about where
the investigation is headed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Orlando's mayor
said today
that investigators do know that
Mateen visited
several locations Saturday
night. He didn't
elaborate.
GWEN IFILL: Senate Democrats
launched a filibuster
today, demanding tougher gun
controls in the
aftermath of Orlando.
Connecticut Senator
Chris Murphy and several others
spent much
of the day calling for a vote on
barring gun
sales to people on the terrorist
watch-list.
SEN. CHRIS MURPHY (D),
Connecticut: In the
face of mass slaughter after
mass slaughter,
this body has taken absolutely
no action.
And I know that times are tough
here. I know
that we're often at each others'
throats,
but that, in and of itself, is
unacceptable.
Let's find some limited common
ground on issues
that the broad American
electorate support,
and let's move forward on it.
GWEN IFILL: Meanwhile,
Republican presidential
candidate Donald Trump told a
rally in Atlanta,
carnage could have been avoided
if some of
the Orlando victims had
themselves been carrying
guns.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
If the bullets were going in the
other direction,
aimed at this guy who was just
open target
practice, you would've had a
situation, folks,
which would've been always
horrible, but nothing
like the carnage that we all, as
a people,
suffered this weekend.
GWEN IFILL: Trump said he will
meet with the
National Rifle Association to
discuss tying
gun sales to the terror watch
and no-fly lists.
In response, the NRA says it
supports delaying
gun sales to terror suspects for
72 hours,
but it wants a way to take
people off the
watch list, if they're wrongly
accused.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another tragedy
played out
in the Orlando area today, after
an alligator
snatched and killed a 2-year-old
boy at Walt
Disney World. It happened
Tuesday evening
at the Seven Seas Lagoon, as the
boy was wading
near shore. Police reported that
search teams
found the body today and that it
was intact.
The resort closed all its
beaches.
GWEN IFILL: The wreckage of a
missing EgyptAir
plane has been spotted deep in
the Mediterranean
Sea. Egyptian officials say they
have identified
several main locations on the
ocean floor.
The flight disappeared on May
19, killing
all 66 people on board. The
cause of the crash
remains unclear.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Federal
Reserve left a
key short-term interest rate
unchanged today,
in light of an uncertain jobs
picture. In
a statement, the central bank
said -- quote
-- "The labor market has slowed,
while growth
in economic activity appears to
have picked
up."
Fed Chair Janet Yellen
elaborated:
JANET YELLEN, Federal Reserve
Chair: Although
recent labor market data have,
on balance,
been disappointing, it's
important not to
overreact to one or two monthly
readings.
The committee continues to
expect that the
labor market will strengthen
further over
the next few years. That said,
we will be
watching the job market
carefully.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yellen said Fed
policy-makers
are also watching for any
economic fallout
from Britain's vote next week on
whether to
stay in the European Union.
GWEN IFILL: The Fed's news
failed to reassure
Wall Street, as stocks fell for
a fifth day.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 34 points
to close at 17640. The Nasdaq
gave up eight
points, and the S&P 500 dropped
nearly four.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
met with the
Dalai Lama today, despite
China's warnings
that it would damage
U.S.-Chinese ties. Beijing
accuses the spiritual leader of
Tibet's Buddhists
of campaigning to split the
region from China.
The White House released a photo
of the meeting,
but allowed no other coverage.
GWEN IFILL: Medical news on two
fronts today.
The World Health Organization
now says there's
no conclusive evidence that
drinking coffee
causes cancer. That reverses a
25-year-old
warning. Instead, the WHO says
the real issue
is temperature. If you routinely
drink anything
that's very hot, about 150
degrees or more,
there's limited evidence it
could lead to
cancer of the esophagus.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A major city in
southern India
is on high alert for polio after
an active
strain was found in sewage
water. The alert
in Hyderabad means about 350,000
children
will be vaccinated next week.
India was declared
free of polio in 2014.
GWEN IFILL: And astronomers have
picked up
new echoes of two black holes
crashing into
each other deep in space. The
collision generated
a gravitational wave that gave
off a high-pitched
chirp. It's only the second time
that Earth-based
instruments have detected a
gravitational
wave, and it helps prove the
first time wasn't
a fluke.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
Donald Trump takes an unexpected
stance on
gun control; a new report
detailing racial
bias by the Oakland California
police; how
the Muslim community is
responding to the
attack in Orlando; and much
more.
GWEN IFILL: No matter which side
you are on,
the 2016 campaign is already on
the books
as one of the most unusual in
modern history.
Just this week, Donald Trump,
Hillary Clinton
and President Obama have offered
a preview
of what's to come, with attacks,
counterattacks,
and harsh disagreement over
policy, both foreign
and domestic.
From guns, to refugees, to
immigration, it
has turned into a campaign like
no other.
Call it the Trump effect.
Joining us to explain the hows
and whys, Trump
senior campaign adviser Barry
Bennett, Wall
Street Journal political
reporter Beth Reinhard,
and pollster J. Ann Selzer.
Ann Selzer, you just completed a
poll with
Bloomberg Politics that was
released yesterday.
Tell me, is there anything in
there to support
my notion that there is a Trump
effect this
year?
J. ANN SELZER, Selzer & Company,
Inc.: Well,
there are a couple of things in
there, Gwen.
First of all, what we see
happening right
now is a 12-point lead for
Hillary Clinton
over Donald Trump, 49 to 37.
That's a substantial
lead, and polls recently have
been showing
this a tighter race than that.
So the Trump
effect for right now, overall,
doesn't appear
to be a winning position.
But, secondly, you asked about
whether this
is a race like no other, and
pollsters have
been going through their
archives trying to
find some little piece of data
to shine a
light on that. And I found one
today. If you
look at the proportion of
Republicans who
have unfavorable feelings toward
Donald Trump,
it's 27 percent.
And you might think, well, this
is just a
year that everybody hates
everybody. The number
is 15 percent for Hillary
Clinton. That's
looking just at Democratic
voters. But I went
back to our archives to see,
four years ago,
what was the situation with Mitt
Romney, because
maybe you think Republicans
always have -- there
is a substantial group that are
unhappy with
their nominee. It was 11
percent.
So Donald Trump, even within the
confines
of his own party, is turning off
a substantial
number of people there, and
that's a Trump
effect, too.
GWEN IFILL: Barry Bennett, he's
also turning
on a substantial amount of
people. How do
you measure that? How do you
weigh that against
each other?
BARRY BENNETT, Trump Campaign
Senior Adviser:
Well, I think, typically, a
candidate comes
to a race and he comes within
the four out
of four voters and the three out
of four voters,
and you fight the campaign over
the two out
of four voters.
It's kind of the inverse this
cycle. Right?
He comes with a bunch of the
folks who are
not traditional voters, not
traditional Republican
voters. In fact, in Youngstown,
Ohio, for
instance, in January, there were
16,000 registered
Republicans. Today, that number
is 38,000.
It's a huge shift. Now, these
three out of
fours...
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: In an important
state.
BARRY BENNETT: IN a very
important state.
These three-fours and
four-fours, which supported
somebody else in the primary,
they will come
home. It will take some time,
but they will
come home.
GWEN IFILL: You have covered
more -- you have
been to this rodeo before, Beth,
so as you
compare this to previous
campaigns, what to
you is the most significant
difference?
Beth Reinhard, The Wall Street
Journal: There
is very little that's familiar
about this
race. Donald Trump has not just
rewritten
the rule book, but taken the old
one, burnt
it, thrown it in the ocean.
Everything about how he runs his
campaign
and how he conducts himself is
unlike anything
we have ever seen before. The
way he interacts
with the media is...
GWEN IFILL: Or not.
BETH REINHARD: Or not. In that
case, disqualifying
reporters from covering him
based on stories
he doesn't like, we haven't seen
that before.
The way he calls in to so many
of the television
networks and really is just
running his own
media operation on television
and on Twitter
is unlike anything we have seen
before.
GWEN IFILL: Ann, we know that
Americans still
think largely the country is on
the wrong
track. Is that also a number,
which we watch
very carefully every four years,
is that something
which could also maybe speak to
the kind of
effect that Donald Trump is
having, something
that he can take advantage of?
J. ANN SELZER: Well, our poll is
showing that
the percent of people showing
that the nation
is headed off in the wrong
direction has reached
one of its highest points since
we started
polling in 2009.
So there's a lot of discomfort
at the national
level. That's usually a
reflection on the
view of the president. And,
actually, Barack
Obama's numbers were not so
terrible in our
poll. So there sort of is this
breaking apart
of the things that we used to
think hung together
and gave you a pretty clear view
of the way
the nation was heading.
Not so anymore.
GWEN IFILL: Barry Bennett, there
are all these
contradictions. The perfect
example today
is Donald Trump says that he's
going to speak
to the NRA about changing the
no-fly lists
for gun purchases, or who can
purchase guns,
which is something the NRA
objects to.
He has also said he supports the
LGBT community
in the wake of Orlando, but not
that he supports
gay marriage. Is it -- is that
Americans can
hold two opposing thoughts in
their heads
at one time?
BARRY BENNETT: Well, I think
often in politics
we come up with this monolithic
view of things.
And this cycle is a perfect
example of where
none of that is really true.
Right?
There's no such thing as the
average Hispanic
voter, right? They're all over
the place.
Some are faith-based. Some are
small business-based.
Some are family-based. Some are
just young
progressives.
So we're challenging all the
norms that we
have seen in campaigns. But I
think that the
tone of the country, the 45
percent of the
folks think we're going in the
wrong direction,
which is an all-time record.
They have also
figured out they don't
necessarily have to
like or love the candidate for
president,
which we have always believed to
be true.
They want to someone who will go
to Washington
literally with a bulldozer's
license and just
fix things. And that's, I think,
what we're
seeing.
I mean, otherwise, how could
Donald Trump's
approval rating, according to
Ann's poll,
be at 29 percent and his ballot
be in the
40s? It's not possible during
traditional
political metrics. Right?
GWEN IFILL: Well, there are no
traditional
political metrics which apply, I
think we
can all agree.
Let me ask you, Beth, about
this, though.
We have -- it feels like we have
just lurched
into the general election
campaign. Maybe
Bernie Sanders is still in the
race, but it
doesn't feel like that's what's
driving this
anymore.
so, how different is -- are
primary races,
aside from 17 people on the
Republican ticket
-- how different are they from
general election
races, and does it matter in a
nontraditional
year like this?
BETH REINHARD: Donald Trump,
people keep saying
he's going to -- quote, unquote
-- "pivot"
to the general election. And we
have all been
sitting on the edge of our seats
waiting for
that to happen, and it really
hasn't.
In fact, he still talks about
rivals that
fell away months ago, as if he's
still reliving
those conquests. And, of course,
he has talked
quite a bit about Hillary as
well. But it
does still have the feel of a
primary, in
that the rhetoric is just as
fury and just
as harsh as you see in a
primary, where people
are trying to appeal to that
fire-breathing
base.
He hasn't really moderated his
tone, which
is what people expect once you
become the
nominee, that you're going to
try to reach
this wider audience with, you
know, more warmer
tones. Donald Trump is hitting
it as hard
as ever.
GWEN IFILL: Ann Selzer, that
reminds me, yesterday,
the president came as close to
fire-breathing
as I guess he ever gets, in his
pretty full-throated,
without mentioning his name,
attack on Donald
Trump, the things that Donald
Trump stands
for.
At the same time, am I right,
his approval
rating seems to be creeping up?
J. ANN SELZER: Yes, his approval
rating is
creeping up. His favorability
numbers are
creeping up. He's about on a par
with Bill
Clinton, who has usually
surpassed him a little
bit there.
I think, however, there are
things that are
still bothering the general
electorate as
they look at Donald Trump. We
tested a few
items, and half say they're
bothered a lot
by Trump's ban on Muslim
immigrants, 55 percent
bothered a lot about comments he
made about
the judge ruling in the Trump
University case,
and 62 percent bothered a lot
about his tone
with women, 62 percent. That's
bothered a
lot. That's the strongest answer
they could
give us. And it's 71 percent
among women.
So, the one last thing I want to
share with
you is that we know he can
change things if
he wants to. When we first were
polling on
Donald Trump here in Iowa a year
ago, his
favorable-to-unfavorable ratio
was 2-to-1
unfavorable. And within the
course of a few
months, he flipped it to where
it was 2-to-1
favorable to unfavorable. So,
he's done magic
before.
GWEN IFILL: So, let me ask Barry
Bennett,
doing magic, how does he flip
those numbers?
BARRY BENNETT: Well, I think
when people hear
his policy positions, you could
either believe
what Hillary Clinton says about
his policies
or you can listen to him, that
they will come
to appreciate where he is.
You know, government is not
working. We know
precious little -- for instance,
this idea
of radical Islamism, we know
precious little
about what causes people to
radicalize. We
have been dealing with this for
a number of
years now.
You would think that we would
have a better
understanding, we would have a
better screening,
have a better watching and
calculation. But
all of our processes that the
government has
put in place have not worked.
GWEN IFILL: Do you think he's
been specific
enough about what the
alternative to that
is?
BARRY BENNETT: Well, you can
never be specific
enough. Right? That's what
campaigns are about.
But, I mean, that's why we have
150-some days
to talk about it. But that's
what we're going
to talk about in the campaign.
But there are
just so many people in America
who are suffering
real pain. And the current
policies of this
administration and even some of
the policies
from the previous administration
just never
helped them. And that's what
we're going to
talk about.
GWEN IFILL: Barry Bennett,
senior Trump campaign
adviser, Beth Reinhard,
political reporter
for The Wall Street Journal, and
Ann Selzer,
the redoubtable Ann Selzer of
the Bloomberg
poll, thank you all very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The police
department in Oakland,
California, has a long and
troubled history.
The most recent scandal to roil
the department
involves alleged sexual
misconduct by officers.
Police chief Sean Whent resigned
last week
for reportedly mishandling that
situation.
And there are decades of tension
and mistrust
between officers and the
African-American
community.
Stanford University has been
studying that
often volatile relationship, and
the results
of its groundbreaking study were
released
today.
Special correspondent Jackie
Judd has our
exclusive report.
JACKIE JUDD: The report confirms
what African-American
residents of Oakland,
California, have long
known, seen and felt. Police
often treat them
very differently than white
residents.
REBECCA HETEY, Stanford
University: We found
a significant pattern of racial
disparities
in who was stopped, in who was
handcuffed,
in who was searched, and in who
was arrested.
JACKIE JUDD: Rebecca Hetey is a
Stanford University
researcher and an author of the
report.
REBECCA HETEY: More importantly,
these disparities
remained significant after we
took into account
a wide range of factors that we
would expect
to influence police
decision-making, like
crime rate, like neighborhood
demographics.
REV. MICHAEL MCBRIDE, Operation
Ceasefire:
It is an insult. And no one can
make me believe
that this would be happening in
any other
community, except for a
community that is
defined by black, brown and poor
people.
JACKIE JUDD: Activists and
brothers Michael
and Ben McBride are longtime
critics of the
Oakland Police Department.
REV. BEN MCBRIDE, Operation
Ceasefire: We
have a broken relationship
because, while
there have been some steps
moving forward
to try to repair it, there still
has not been
the kind of honest discourse
that needs to
happen around truth and
reconciliation.
JACKIE JUDD: According to the
most recent
FBI statistics, Oakland has more
violent crime
than any other U.S. city except
for Detroit
and Memphis. It was in this
supercharged atmosphere
that city officials took an
unprecedented
step. They decided to have
outsiders analyze
their officers' behavior,
knowing the results
wouldn't be pretty.
Oakland Mayor Libby Schaaf:
LIBBY SCHAAF, Mayor of Oakland,
California:
It is incredibly important that
we ask these
hard questions, so that we can
get to the
bottom of making the department
something
that the community trusts and
that is, in
fact, bringing justice.
WOMAN: So, this when I just
broke down the
entire stops into both race and
gender.
JACKIE JUDD: Researchers at
nearby Stanford
University spent two years
analyzing vast
amounts of data, field reports
from 28,000
stops officers made on the
streets and roads
during a 13-month period, and
body-cam video
from 2,000 of those encounters.
They expected
to find about 7,800 stops of
African-Americans.
In fact, there were more than
double, almost
17,000 stops.
What surprised everyone involved
even more
was the huge gap in handcuffing.
REBECCA HETEY: Even when we took
out stops
that resulted in arrests, we
found that one
in four black men, for example,
were handcuffed,
compared to one in 15 white men.
JACKIE JUDD: Analysis of the
body-cam video
also found disparities. Lead
researcher Jennifer
Eberhardt says, while no racial
slurs were
uttered, certain words were used
far more
frequently when an officer
questioned an African-American.
JENNIFER EBERHARDT, Stanford
University: We
started by just looking at
linguistic patterns
in that footage. And we found,
for black stops,
words that are associated with
probation,
parole, arrest, jail time, those
kinds of
things...
JACKIE JUDD: So, there was an
assumption that
the black person who had been
stopped had
a criminal record?
JENNIFER EBERHARDT: There was a
possibility
of that. In our discussions with
community
members, there was a lot of
concern that there
are ways in which they're
stopped where there's
a suspicion of criminality.
So, implicit bias can influence
us unintentionally.
JACKIE JUDD: Eberhardt is a
national expert
on implicit, or unconscious,
bias, and she
trains Oakland officers to
understand what
that means.
Her cautiously worded report
suggests implicit
bias may be behind the racial
disparities
in police stops, along with the
police believing
this is the norm, this is what
their superiors
want them to do. The phrase
racial profiling,
which suggests overt racism, is
never used.
Why is racial profiling such a
radioactive
phrase?
SEAN WHENT, Former Oakland
Police Chief: I
think that race is a very
sensitive issue.
JACKIE JUDD: Former police Chief
Sean Whent,
who resigned last week for
reasons unrelated
to the Stanford report.
SEAN WHENT: Racial profiling, in
and of itself,
obviously is prohibited by our
policy. I mean,
it would be a misconduct issue.
The fact that
people are impacted by implicit
bias, that's
a different issue.
JACKIE JUDD: So you are not
willing to say
that these findings would lead
you to a conclusion
that there is racial profiling
in Oakland?
SEAN WHENT: I don't know how I
could credibly
say that, no, no racial
profiling is ever
-- ever occurs here, although
what I don't
believe necessarily is that
these findings
show that there's systemic
racial profiling
going on. I just think it's much
more complex
than that.
REV. MICHAEL MCBRIDE: I don't
care if it's
implicit or explicit. I want
bias gone. I
want it managed, and I want
people held accountable.
And the people have the right to
be able to
live in a community where bias
is not overdetermining
their lives.
JACKIE JUDD: The report is only
the latest
in a string of critical
evaluations since
the department came under
federal oversight
in 2003 because of police
misconduct.
At the time, the department
agreed to adopt
dozens of reforms within a
five-year period
-- 13 years and millions dollars
later, the
federal government is still
monitoring the
Oakland Police Department.
City officials believe the
department is approaching
the day when that oversight will
end. And
there has been some progress
recently. Use
of excessive force, the number
of arbitrary
searches and citizen complaints
have all declined.
And so has the crime rate
itself.
Sergeant William Febel explains
that different
tactics are now used in
high-crime areas.
SGT. WILLIAM FEBEL, Oakland
Police Department:
So, we use intelligence-based
policing. When
we talk to folks in the area, we
like to particularly
speak with community members.
Community members
help us identify the subjects
who out there
who are involved in criminal
activity.
JACKIE JUDD: The Stanford report
includes
dozens of recommendations,
including more
data collection, sustained
training, annual
review of each officer's stop
data, and regular
community feedback on police
interactions.
Police departments around the
country, including
those caught up in controversial
police shootings
like this one in Chicago, are
watching what
Oakland does now and how the
local community
responds.
Paul Figueroa leads Oakland's
reform efforts.
PAUL FIGUEROA, Interim Chief,
Oakland Police
Department: We're at a position
in reform,
not only locally, but
nationally, that we're
finally getting to the point
where we have
the data, where we can take some
real action.
LIBBY SCHAAF: I believe that, at
the end of
my term, people will be able to
say that this
city really grappled honestly
with some very
difficult issues, like race,
like oppression,
like class differences.
REV. MICHAEL MCBRIDE: Every
mayor that we
have been in relationship with,
the last three
mayors, have all told us that:
We're working
as fast as we can, we're close,
we're close.
And then they go out of office,
and then we
have to hear the exact same
rhetoric from
the sitting mayor.
JENNIFER EBERHARDT: I think, on
all sides,
people want this relationship to
work right.
I think African-Americans
especially don't
want to feel fearful of the
police, of the
people who are supposed to
protect them. And
I think the police officers
don't want to
feel like targeted. They don't
want to feel
like perpetrators of bias.
JACKIE JUDD: At this roll call,
new recruits
join veteran officers as they
prepare for
their first shift of a very
tough job. With
this revealing report in hand,
commanders
will expect them to carry out
more even-handed
policing. And a wary community
will be watching.
For the "PBS NewsHour" this is
Jackie Judd
in Oakland, California.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
efforts to boost
diversity in an elite high
school; and why
one author calls the Democratic
Party's policies
liberalism of the rich.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, first: how
the Muslim
community in Orlando is
responding to the
mass shooting.
As investigators continue to try
to understand
the motives of the Orlando
shooter, the fact
that he was a Muslim has put
another community
of American Muslims in an
uncomfortable spot,
disavowing the actions of an
extremist, while
also facing a backlash
themselves.
William Brangham has the story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As news broke
early Sunday
about the killings in Orlando,
Joshua Weil
thought what many Muslims
thought about the
attacker.
JOSHUA WEIL, Islamic Center of
Orlando: My
first thought is always, and
sadly, like,
please don't let him be Muslim.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Weil is a
member of the
Islamic Center of Orlando, one
of the largest
Muslim mosques in this area. Of
course, news
quickly broke that the killer,
Omar Mateen,
was, in fact, a Muslim. The
attacks occurred
right after Saturday night's
Ramadan prayers.
JOSHUA WEIL: The thought
occurred to me that,
if this guy was Muslim, he
probably just left
one of these mosques. He might
even have left
this mosque. He might've been
standing and
praying Taraweeh, like, standing
side-by-side
with his brothers and listening
to the Koran,
and then he left that to go
murder all these
people.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Tariq Rasheed
is the imam
of this mosque.
TARIQ RASHEED, Imam, Islamic
Center of Orlando:
Every Muslim in this country and
in Orlando
is grieved. And they are in
shock. They are
asking questions, how can this
happen here
in Orlando? How can a person
with Muslim faith
can do this?
So, you know, people are very
much in a shock,
I can tell you, everyone. And
then -- and
there is a fear factor as well,
that you know
there might be a backlash.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The mosque
held a candlelight
vigil for the shooting victims
the night after
the killings, and they have
publicly and repeatedly
condemned the attack, saying
Mateen's actions
are no reflection of their
religion.
Imam Rasheed says this is the
new reality
for the American-Muslim
community, having
to account for the violent
actions of a few
extremists who claim to share
their faith.
TARIQ RASHEED: We have nothing
to do with
this. We don't know who this guy
was, where
is he coming from, because
terrorism has no
religion. And, in religion,
there is no terrorism.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This is what
happened in
San Bernardino and what happened
at the military
base in Texas, where one of
these events occur
and then the Muslim community is
called to
condemn. Are you guys sick of
being asked
to condemn?
SYED QUADRI, Islamic Center of
Orlando: Absolutely.
Sick is the right word. We are
sick of this.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Syed Quadri
and his wife,
Rubana Khan, and their three
kids are members
of this mosque. Syed's a
psychiatrist and
Rubana is an accountant who
helps manage his
practice.
RUBANA KHAN, Islamic Center of
Orlando: I
actually was terrified and
finding out what
exactly happened. And of course,
our heart
goes out to all the mothers and
fathers who
have lost their kids. It's
unfortunate. And
it's terrible that these kinds
of incidents
are continuing to happen. And
it's putting
a bad name on the Muslim
community.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Many people
believe there
is something about Islam that
draws a paranoid,
radicalized thinking. What do
you say to people
who think that that part -- that
that's part
and parcel of your faith?
SYED QUADRI: Well, I'm not going
to deny that.
There is radicalism in every
religion, I think,
you know? Islam gets attention
because of
everything that's going around
in the world.
And I'm not going to say these
people are
not radical Islamists.
Definitely, they are,
but they are not a part of
Islam.
We do not consider them Muslims.
We do not
consider them a part of Islam.
Islam is all
about peace, nothing to do with
hatred or
violence.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But these
repeated disavowals
haven't stopped the threats. The
mosque's
Facebook page, beneath its
tributes to the
victims, has been repeatedly
covered with
death threats and angry
denunciations of Islam.
The mosque says they have
received similar
voice-mail messages.
Joshua Weil says most of these
are likely
just angry venting after the
attacks, but
some of them were simply too
specific to ignore.
JOSHUA WEIL: He see us parasites
at the Publix
at Hialeah all the time.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The grocery
store.
JOSHUA WEIL: Yes. The grocery
store on Hialeah
all the time, and that the next
time he sees
one of us, he's going to take
care of them.
And that was the one that got us
most. We
contacted the police with that
one.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The mosque
alerted the police,
but now they have also hired an
armed guard
to patrol the grounds during
prayer services.
Imam Rasheed says Ramadan is
usually the busiest
time at the mosque, but now
people are afraid
to come.
TARIQ RASHEED: Sisters in the
community, they
texted me, you know what, I'm
not coming today.
You know, we are fearful. We
don't want to
come. And they didn't send their
children.
You know, we have never done
this. We have
never done this. And this mosque
has been
in operation for the last 32
years.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Weil says that
he and his
wife, Anna, who's also Muslim,
don't want
to give into fear, but he
understands it.
Weil is a teacher by day, and
also works as
an outreach director for the
mosque.
He says, especially at times
like this, people
need to worship together, not
apart. But Anna
said, she thinks the anger out
there is serious
enough to stay away from the
mosque for now.
ANNA WEIL, Orlando Resident: We
have not gone
to the mosque for dinner, for
prayers or anything
since the shooting happened.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You and the
kids?
ANNA WEIL: Yes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Weil says
these attacks
have also shined a light on a
generational
divide within the Muslim
community over the
issue of homosexuality.
He says most of the younger
American-born
Muslims here have condemned the
attacks and
embraced the gay community
that's been victimized
by this killer. But he says some
of the older
generation, those largely born
abroad in much
more conservative societies,
have struggled
with how to respond.
JOSHUA WEIL: They want to
condemn this. They
want to -- they do believe it's
horrible and
they do think that it never
should've happened,
but they don't want to go as far
as to, you
know, embrace or say that they
support homosexuality,
and they kind of feel that this
awkward place.
It's almost been nice to see
some of them
reluctantly move in and say, no,
we see now
this is a community that we
should be supporting.
This is a community that faces
all of the
same bigotry and all of the
same, you know,
anger and aggression from many
of the same
people that we do.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
reverberations from
this attack have also spilled
onto the campaign
trail. Citing Orlando, Donald
Trump doubled
down on his call to ban Muslim
immigration,
although the shooter was born in
New York
City.
President Obama and some GOP
leaders have
again condemned that proposal.
What is your response when you
hear some of
the political rhetoric that
happens -- that
flows after attacks like this?
SYED QUADRI: It is unfortunate
that some people
take advantage of these kinds of
incidents.
And, you know, they are banking
on their votes.
They are trying to build their
political careers
out of all those. That's all I
can say.
RUBANA KHAN: Well, I consider
myself an American
and an American Muslim.
SYED QUADRI: Absolutely.
RUBANA KHAN: So, and I -- it
hurts that if
somebody would try to take that
away from
me, because this is my country.
This is where
I grew up. So, when you tell me
to leave,
where am I supposed to go? You
give me an
answer.
SYED QUADRI: That's right.
That's right.
RUBANA KHAN: This is my home.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Muslim
community here
hopes the anger directed at them
will soon
subside and that the whole
Orlando community
can continue its slow process of
healing from
this tragedy.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham
in Orlando, Florida.
GWEN IFILL: As the school year
nears its end,
a number of highly selective
public high schools
around the country are
struggling to deal
with a longer-term problem, how
to enroll
more students of color.
Special correspondent Spencer
Michels looks
at one such school, in this
report produced
in association with Education
Week. It's part
of our weekly series, Making the
Grade.
SPENCER MICHELS: Lowell High
School in San
Francisco excels in everything
from music
to math. Motivated, hard-driving
and talented
students have propelled this
four-year institution
to the top tier of national
public school
rankings.
Its graduates include
scientists, politicians,
entertainers and a Supreme Court
justice.
Chrislyn Earle, here in a
psychology class,
is a senior.
CHRISLYN EARLE, Student: I
wouldn't imagine
myself at any other school, to
be honest.
This school really builds you
for the next
step and the next chapter in
your life.
SPENCER MICHELS: But there is
something missing
at Lowell, more students like
Earle from historically
disadvantaged minority groups.
She is one
of a very small and dwindling
number of African-Americans,
about 2 percent of the student
body. Latinos
make up about 10 percent, while
Asians comprise
57 percent, and whites, also
dwindling, at
14 percent.
KAREN POLANCO, Student: I think
the people
who are minorities at this
school feel left
out. And it is hard to find a
place in this
school. Like, my freshman year,
I wanted to
transfer.
KADEE SYLLA, Student: I wanted
to leave immediately.
I wanted to go to Balboa
instead, because
I know that there's -- it's more
diverse over
there.
SPENCER MICHELS: That issue came
to a head
this spring when a non-black
student put up
a poster that drew the ire of
many at Lowell.
Titled Black History Month, it
glorified black
rappers and movies, lampooned
President Obama,
and failed to mention
historically important
figures.
African-American students walked
out of class
and marched to city hall to
protest.
CHRISLYN EARLE: The poster was
the straw that
broke the camel's back.
SPENCER MICHELS: Earle lives
with her mother,
Shronda Jackson (ph).
CHRISLYN EARLE: The whole main
purpose of
the walkout is the students at
Lowell and
staff members were not
respectful to the black
culture. We were trying to
explain that we
are more than just our music and
the movies
and entertainment. This is not
OK and it's
very insulting.
SPENCER MICHELS: Earle didn't
expect that
when she took a test and applied
to Lowell,
which is a free public school.
WOMAN: When we received the
letter that she
was accepted, I was ecstatic.
SPENCER MICHELS: But Earle says
she didn't
realize how few
African-Americans she'd meet.
CHRISLYN EARLE: It didn't really
soak in until
I got inside the classroom, and
I was the
only black person in there.
SPENCER MICHELS: Diversity and
how to achieve
it is a hot topic at Boston
Latin, a selective
public high school in
Massachusetts, at Stuyvesant
in New York, and at other elite
schools, many
of which are majority Asian.
Often, as at Lowell, the
African-American
student population is dropping.
Officials
point to the declining numbers
of blacks living
in San Francisco, now just 4
percent, as one
factor in the decrease in black
students at
Lowell. Other factors include
poor preparation
in early grades, low test-taking
skills and,
in some cases, disruptive or
difficult home
life, suggests San Francisco
Schools superintendent
Richard Carranza.
RICHARD CARRANZA, San Francisco
Schools Superintendent:
Some families are homeless. Some
families
are living in poverty. Some
students are in
foster care.
How do we rally to create a
mosaic of supports
for students that have been
historically disadvantaged,
to give them the equity boost
they need to
meet the bar that we have set
for them to
get into different kinds of
schools?
SPENCER MICHELS: The low numbers
of blacks
and Latinos at Lowell, for
whatever reason,
discourages other students of
color from even
applying.
Lowell is certainly interesting,
because of
the diversity problems that it
and several
elite high schools around the
country are
facing. But, for me, it's
personal. My wife,
my grandfather, and my father
all went to
Lowell, and I have a son who is
teaching here
now.
Just for the record, I went to a
high school
across town.
But when principal Andrew
Ishibashi, who has
worked in, and attended,
inner-city schools
first became principal here, he
was shocked.
MD-BO /ANDREW ISHIBASHI,
Principal, Lowell
High School: I found that
diversity was the
weakest area at Lowell. It's
something that
I have worried about for the
past nine years.
SPENCER MICHELS: Micia Mosely, a
part-time
stand-up comedian and teacher
who founded
the Black Teacher Project in the
Bay Area...
MICIA MOSELY, Black Teacher
Project: We at
the Black Teacher Project
believe that every
child deserves a black
teacher...
SPENCER MICHELS: ... says it's
not a surprise
that elite schools lack
diversity.
MICIA MOSELY: By nature, they're
exclusive.
So how do you have diversity
inside a system
or an organization or a school
that's designed
to shut people out? We say we
want diversity
in this country. We're asking
things of schools
that we're unwilling to do of
ourselves.
SPENCER MICHELS: Her answer?
MICIA MOSELY: So, you groom
people. So, this
idea that folks are born
innately with the
skills to succeed in these elite
schools is
ridiculous. Everyone's groomed.
Whether that
means that you have a parent
making sure your
academics are in order, or you
go to a good
school that's preparing you,
folks don't come
out of the womb ready to succeed
in an elite
school.
SPENCER MICHELS: But bringing
more people
of color into Lowell is not
simple, says superintendent
Carranza.
RICHARD CARRANZA: Well, if we
knew that, we'd
have already figured it out, and
so would
have Stuyvesant and Boston
Latin. If you see
students of color in your
school, are they
made to feel like they're
welcome? Or do students
of color feel like, well,
they're just a quota?
SPENCER MICHELS: Lowell's
principal has tried
to dispel that feeling and boost
academic
performance by meeting
occasionally at lunchtime
with black freshmen and
sophomores and a special
consultant to go over grades and
problems.
ANDREW ISHIBASHI: How did you
guys do last
spring?
STUDENT: First semester, I was
like really
great at algebra II. Even though
I was doubling
up, you would think that I would
fall behind,
but I did it.
ANDREW ISHIBASHI: So, have you
come down here
for tutoring? I have seen you
guys down here,
but...
STUDENT: Yes. I come down here
to study, get
a few tutors.
STUDENT: You know, my Spanish
grade was like
really bad. It was like an F.
And now it's
to a B, because I worked really
hard to get
it there.
SPENCER MICHELS: Addressing the
issues of
diversity frankly is a major
goal of an elective
class in critical thinking and
social change.
CHARLES HUYNH, Student: A lot of
people don't
want to go to a school full of a
lot of Asians
and then just like -- you know?
So, it discourages
people from going to Lowell.
PHILIP MA, Student: I just feel
we -- we're
usually too busy studying and
getting a good
GPA and stuff. As a result, we
haven't really
had time to think about how what
we do impacts
minorities and all that stuff.
SPENCER MICHELS: Malia Cohen, a
member of
San Francisco's Board of
Supervisors, and
a graduate of Lowell in 1996,
wants the district
to allocate more money to
address enrollment
at her alma mater.
MALIA COHEN, San Francisco Board
of Supervisors:
So, when it comes to actually
hiring a person
specifically charged with the
duty of targeting
an increasing enrollment, that's
what we're
not seeing.
RICHARD CARRANZA: Who's going to
pay for that?
Do I hire another English
teacher or math
teacher, or do I hire another
specialized
person to do something?
SPENCER MICHELS: Lowell's
principal has made
recruiting a priority, going
into black and
Latino communities and
persuading promising
students to apply to Lowell. As
for making
it easier for students to get
in, it's a topic
that was hashed out and rejected
in court
years ago.
ANDREW ISHIBASHI: I would like
to see a little
dent in as far as not having to
pull such
high test scores and grades.
SPENCER MICHELS: But the way to
get more minority
kids into elite schools, nearly
everyone agrees,
is to start young.
MICIA MOSELY: I went to Brooklyn
Tech High
School in New York City, which
is a specialized
high school, and had to take an
exam. And
I know that the preparation I
had in elementary
and middle school allowed me to
do well on
that exam, allowed me to do well
in school.
SPENCER MICHELS: Lowell and the
nation's other
elite public high schools have
acknowledged
they have a long way to go to
achieve the
diversity they say they value.
For the "PBS NewsHour" and
Education Week,
I'm Spencer Michels in San
Francisco.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
a look at
some of the backstory to this
year's raucous
political season.
Just as it brought to the
surface tensions
and disaffection within the
Republican Party,
so too have divisions in the
Democratic Party
revealed themselves.
Author and historian Thomas
Frank explores
all this in his latest book,
"Listen, Liberal."
I sat down with Frank recently
in our studio.
Thomas Frank, welcome to the
program.
THOMAS FRANK, Author, "Listen,
Liberal": Good
to be here, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we should say
the subtitle
is "What Ever Happened to the
Party of the
People?"
You were talking about the
Democrats, but
just before we talk about what
you think is
wrong with the Democratic Party
now, when
was the last time you thought
the Democratic
Party was doing what it was
supposed to do?
THOMAS FRANK: Well, there's a --
look, there's
still a lot of good Democrats
out there, the
Democrats that get the -- like,
the seal of
approval from me, you know, that
get five
stars. There's plenty of
Democrats that I
approve of.
And I will say that I
enthusiastically voted
for President Obama back in
2008. So -- but,
on the other hand, I think that
the party
has really abandoned its
dedication to working-class
Americans, beginning in the
1970s, and has
progressively abandoned it more
and more and
more, that sort of traditional
Democratic
mission.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean, you're
hard. In your
book, you're pretty hard on
President Obama
in not fulfilling what you argue
was the promise
of his presidency. You're hard
on both of
the Clintons, both Bill Clinton
and Hillary
Clinton.
But you also make the striking
point that
the inequality that we have in
this country
is something that they think is
a good thing?
THOMAS FRANK: Well, it's
something that -- I
wouldn't say that. Barack Obama
called it
the -- what did he call it? The
great -- the
overriding challenge of our
time.
But, yes, he has a way of
putting it, and
when he speaks about it in this
very eloquent
manner, he makes it clear that
this is something
he deplores, something that, you
know, he
finds shocking.
However, the Democratic Party,
the sort of
leadership faction of the
Democratic Party,
isn't really at their core
bothered by inequality.
They think that, to a certain
degree, it reflects
the way things ought to be. This
is because
the Democratic Party isn't --
the leadership
of the Democratic Party is not
who we think
they are.
It's a different group of people
serving a
different agenda than what we --
than their
brand identity tells us they
are.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you describe
them as pretty
much the opposite of the working
class, the
blue-collar workers in this
country.
THOMAS FRANK: Yes. Yes. That's
not who they're
interested in anymore.
Once upon a time, say, Franklin
Roosevelt
or Lyndon Johnson or somebody
like that, yes,
absolutely, that's what the
Democratic Party
was about. They were about the
middle class
of this country. Today, they are
about the
professional, managerial, highly
educated,
white-collar, affluent, suburban
class. That's
who they identify with.
That's who they -- they have
sort of developed
this enormous literature talking
about how
this class of people is of the
pinnacle of
history. This is also the class
they are all
-- themselves, that they
themselves are drawn
from.
They talk about these people all
the time.
And they see that, you know,
this group of
winners is, you know, the
ultimate, the sort
of number one Democratic
constituency, they
think that that class of people
deserves to
be where they are, that this is
-- that their
status is something that they
have earned.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's a pretty
harsh criticism.
And you're basically saying that
the leadership
of the Democratic Party, Silicon
Valley, the
academics, the folks on Wall
Street who are
Democrats, really don't care
about the working
class.
THOMAS FRANK: Yes, that's
exactly right. That's
exactly right.
The more shocking thing is that
the Democrats
basically are a party that
identifies itself
with Wall Street and that
with Silicon Valley and that
identifies itself
with big pharma, with these
industries that
they're forever talking about
and saluting
because they're so creative,
they're so innovative.
This is where these sort of
knowledge-based
industries, where -- the kind of
professionals
that Democrats see themselves as
representing,
this is where those kind of
people are found.
And so they look at Wall Street
and they don't
see this kind of colossal
villain or, you
know, the way, say, someone like
Franklin
Roosevelt would have understood
Wall Street.
Instead, they see classmates.
They see their
peers. You know, they have a
really difficult
time bringing this industry to
heel or making
sure that the rule of law
applies to this
industry.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you end the
book, Thomas
Frank, on a pretty pessimistic
note, because
you say until Democrat -- the
leaders in the
Democratic Party understand the
role they
have played in bringing things
to this place,
things aren't going to get
better.
THOMAS FRANK: Yes, that's
exactly right, because
it's clear that the Republican
Party -- it's
clear from my point of view, I
should say,
that the Republican Party, with
its dedication
to markets and its philosophy of
entrepreneurs,
is not really interested in
inequality.
But what's shocking is when you
realize that
the Democrats themselves aren't
really interested
in it either, that the kind of
liberalism
that you see in the Democratic
Party is a
liberalism of the rich, that
it's the liberalism
of the top 10 percent of the
income distribution,
of a kind of -- of a tiny swathe
of Americans
who have actually done very well
in the era
of inequality. And that's
shocking once you
realize that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What are the
implications of
this for this year's election?
THOMAS FRANK: Well, we have a
contest now
that is basically down to Donald
Trump vs.
Hillary Clinton, and between
those two.
On the matter of inequality, one
of them is
really bad and one of them is a
lot less bad.
And that's where we're left. You
know, it's
the sort of same situation that
we have been
in for so many years. No, I
don't think there
is an easy way out this year.
And I think
that the public is going to get
-- these problems
are going to get worse.
Inequality is going
to get worse.
The situation of working people
is going to
get worse. And you're going to
see more public
frustration and more public
anger and more
Bernie Sanders down the road and
more -- unfortunately,
I'm sorry to say, more Donald
Trumps as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's a
provocative book, "Listen,
Liberal: What Ever Happened to
the Party of
the People?"
Thomas Frank, thank you very
much.
THOMAS FRANK: Well, thank you
for having me.
GWEN IFILL: We close tonight
with a personal
reflection on the Orlando
shooting from one
of the city residents William
Brangham introduced
us to earlier.
RUBANA KHAN, Islamic Center of
Orlando: From
my family to you.
Dear families of Pulse victims,
I apologize.
I apologize not for being a
Muslim, but for
the heinous act committed by a
so-called Muslim.
I apologize. I apologize not
because my heart
weeps, but because of all the
hurt and agony
it has caused the victims'
families. I apologize.
My deepest condolences to all
the families
that are affected by this
monstrous act. There
is no place for hatred in Islam.
I apologize.
I apologize not because it was
the holy month
of Ramadan, but because this
lunatic twisted
and misused the peaceful
religion to carry
out his own horrific act.
Please don't judge or hate the
rest of the
Muslim nation. I apologize. I
apologize not
because I'm being judgmental
towards that
monster, but because loved ones
will have
to wait until the day comes when
this monster
shall be held accountable for
his unforgivable
deed.
Please do not despair. I
apologize. I wish
you find peace of mind, knowing
that they
are in a better place than this
world right
now.
May God bless the victims and
their families.
May God bless you. May God bless
America.
I apologize.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now, Margaret Warner takes a
detailed look
at how the Orlando shooter fell
off the FBI's
radar, and the dilemma for law
enforcement
in confronting the growing
threat of homegrown
terrorism.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And later tonight on "Charlie
Rose," former
Deputy FBI Director Tim Murphy
also looks
at the lessons learned from
Orlando.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last night, we
aired a story
about the AR-15 rifle, the
weapon used in
several recent mass shootings.
Orlando law
enforcement officials had
initially said that
this was the same gun type used
in the nightclub
massacre.
But, later, they clarified that
the Orlando
shooter was using a Sig Sauer
MCX. That is
a rifle with several
similarities to the AR-15
style. The Sig Sauer was
originally designed
for use by U.S. special
operations military
forces. The "NewsHour" regrets
the confusion.
And that is the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday, we travel to
Brazil, where fears
over Zika are gripping A local
community and
international athletes ahead of
the Olympics.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.